# Password Managers

## What is a password manager?

<blockquote>

A password manager is essentially an encrypted vault for storing passwords that is itself protected by a master password. In order to  gain access to the passwords stored in the manager, a user has to know the master password; in many cases, a second authentication factor is  required as well. Password vaults can be used to simply store passwords for easy recall, but one of the best features of most password managers is their  ability to generate passwords. A longer password is more secure and harder to crack, and the passwords generated by password managers are  combinations of random numbers and letters that are very secure.

Another important feature of most password managers is the ability to automatically fill in passwords to stored sites. By using that feature you won’t have to type anything but the master password, and it’s also a  good way to avoid having passwords stolen by keylogging malware.

A good password manager will allow you to sync your data between devices so you won’t have to worry about losing data stored on your  desktop if you’re using your smartphone.

</blockquote>

Source: <a href="https://www.techrepublic.com/article/password-managers-a-cheat-sheet-for-professionals/" target="\_blank">https://www.techrepublic.com</a>

## Why do I need a password manager?

You've most likely experienced that moment; when you're about to log-in to a website you haven't been visiting for a while, only to realize that you've forgotten your password! Either that, or some rat bastard has changed the passwords of all your accounts once they've gotten one of your credentials from a data breach of some site you signed up for years ago, what a shame. But wait... how does that even happen?

With the increasing number of online accounts and the need for long, unique passwords to thwart bruteforce attacks, it becomes challenging to remember them all. Humans aren't exactly the best at remembering long, complicated strings of text that are completely different for every service they use. So... in human fashion, most of us get lazy and reuse the same or a similar password everywhere. It's understandable, though. You can't really expect everyone to remember twenty different 16-letter what-appear-to-be keyboard smashes with lowercase and uppercase letters, numbers and special characters perfectly..

However, most people obliviously throw away the security of their entire internet existence and everything they do on it for a bit of convenience. Again, it's totally understandable and a very human thing to do, but that's why password managers were invented. And at least to me, they're a critical aspect of how you use the internet. Instead of remembering twenty different medium-sized passwords for all of the sites you log in to, you instead have to remember one single strong master password that you use NOWHERE ELSE to unlock your vault and auto-fill the correct credentials to the website you're on with a browser extension.

That's the key tip to cybersecurity, or hell.. security as a whole; Redundancy. You want to avoid that single point of failure as much as possible. If you let the password manager generate random passwords for all of your accounts, you don't have to worry as much if one of them is compromised. With a set up password manager, only that one account with that one randomly generated password is affected. If you were to use the same password and E-Mail address everywhere in that same scenario, your entire internet presence, your personal data, your banking and your identity would have been compromised.
  - Yes, it's possible to argue that a password manager is a single point of failure as well, as once you figure out the master password you can get everything.. but that's what 2FA is for. And you're supposed to use the complex master password nowhere else except for your vault, so there'd comparatively be next to no risk of your master password being compromised by third parties compared to reusing passwords everywhere.

## I reuse all my passwords, do I have to change them all manually to be more secure?

Unfortunately, yes. If you want redundancy on your online accounts, you have to go through the time consuming process of resetting all of your passwords and have your password manager generate new ones. manually. by hand.

Fortunately, you only have to do it once in your entire lifetime. ever. It may be a pain in the ass once, but in my eyes, the benefits definitely outweigh the trouble over the long term.

## Which password manager should I choose?

There are quite a few password managers out there, all catering to different use cases.

###### Bitwarden

Bitwarden is an excellent password manager and my personal go-to due to its convenience, automatic synchronization and compatibility between various platforms such as browser extensions or dedicated apps on Windows, macOS, Linux, iOS and Android. Setting up a Bitwarden account is also a breeze – all you need is an email address and a master password to create your vault.

Once your vault is set up, Bitwarden securely stores your login credentials and other sensitive information to Bitwarden's servers. Your data is encrypted before being uploaded, meaning that no one except you can access your master password or the contents of your vault.

Furthermore, Bitwarden has extra features such as an auto-fill for Websites (via Browser Extension), a password generator, secure note storage and the ability to securely share passwords with trusted individuals. Bitwarden is completely free, but has an optional $10/year premium plan with additional security features such as built-in TOTP Code generation for your accounts, access to advanced 2FA methods to unlock your Vault (YubiKey, FIDO WebAuthn, Duo Security) and 1GB of encrypted file attachments.

If you're technically versed and know a bit about networking and containerization, you can even self-host your own Bitwarden server with a docker container so you're in absolute control of your credentials while keeping that convenience of intercompatibility.

###### KeePass

KeePass is another popular, open-source and highly secure password manager that provides advanced features for those who prioritize self-hosting and local control over their credentials. With KeePass, you have full control over where your password databases are stored. Wether it's on your local device, a flash drive or uploaded to a cloud service of your choice; It allows you to keep your sensitive information within your control. You choose how to manage your database

To use KeePass, you simply create a vault/database file locked behind a master password that securely stores your passwords and other credentials. When using KeePass, it's very important to follow good security and backup practices. This includes using a strong and unique master password, regularly backing up and syncing your database file as well as keeping your KeePass software up to date with the latest security patches. It requires more maintenance, thought and effort than Bitwarden, but is an optimal choice for enterprises and people that want to have their confidential information completely local.

## Tips and Best Practices

- Use a strong, complex Master Password that you do not use or mention anywhere else. The Master Password is a password to protect under any circumstance, as someone that figures it out potentially gets access to all of your credentials.
- When generating passwords from your password manager, opt for the longest length that the service you're authenticating to supports. Longer and more complex passwords with a mix of uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters are more secure and tougher to crack.
  - For example; Google allows you to use a 128-character password for your google account. If you're already generating a password for the account and don't intend to memorize it, why settle for anything less than the strongest possible option? It makes it a lot harder for hackers to bruteforce your passwords.
- Use Unique Passwords for Each Account: Avoid the temptation to reuse passwords across multiple accounts. If one account gets compromised, it could potentially lead to other accounts being compromised as well and result in identity theft for email, banking and social media accounts. With a password manager, you can easily generate and store unique passwords for each account without the need to remember them.
- Do not use common words for your passwords and do not associate your passwords with information that is related to you, even worse if it is well as publically available. Examples include names, celebrities, sports teams, birthdates, etc.
- Whenever possible, enable two-factor authentication for your password manager *and* your online accounts. This adds an extra layer of security by requiring a second verification step, such as a code sent to your phone or a physical security key in addition to your password. This means that even if the master password of your vault has been compromised, malicious actors cannot actually get in. The same goes for regular accounts;
  - If you followed the advice to never reuse your passwords, that means that in this case, malicious actors cannot use the compromised password to access other accounts, leaving you a good window of time to simply reset the compromised password and continue with your day.
- Be Cautious of Social engineering and Phishing Attempts that attempt to trick you into revealing your master password or other sensitive information. Always verify the authenticity of websites and email communications before entering your credentials and personal info ANYWHERE.
  - If you start to frequently receiving suspicious E-Mails, check if your E-Mail address has been compromised in a data breach. You can do this by heading to https://haveibeenpwned.com
